Before moving on.
I want to have one more video about activation maximization.
The concept that I will introduce you to in this video is the same as in the previous few videos, in
the sense that the idea is to try to discover the language features that are represented by a single
dimension or single neuron in an LM.
However, the approach here in this video will be a bit different and actually much simpler than in
the previous several videos.
So we're not going to do any training or shaping noise or gradient ascent or anything like that.
Instead, I'm just going to push through tens of thousands of tokens through the model, pick one dimension
from one transformer block, and just see which tokens maximally activate that one dimension.
And when I show you the code, you will see how simple this method really is.
So here's what I will do in the Python demo.
I'll start by importing the GPT neo model from eleuther.
And also the text for the book Through the Looking Glass.
Then I'll pick one layer, one hidden layer, and one dimension.
Basically arbitrarily randomly chosen, process one batch of tokens and literally just search through
all of the activations for all the tokens and find the token that gets the most activation, the strongest
activation from that one dimension, from one layer.
And that is the basics of how this analysis works.
Then I will repeat that a thousand times and collect the token that generates the maximum activation
from each of those 1000 batches, and then I'll just list them out and we'll see if there are any consistencies
that we can identify.
Great.
Let's switch to code.
We don't actually need too many libraries for this code demo.
Here I'm importing the model from Eleuther.
This is GPT neo 125 million parameters.
I will run this on the GPU and switch model into eval mode.
Okay.
And then here I'm importing the text for through the looking glass.
Tokenizing the text.
Printing out the number of tokens is actually just copy.
The whole reason why this line is there is because I just keep copying this code from other code files.
Okay.
So here I'm going to process a batch.
This is going to be a batch of 32 sequences.
And each sequence will be 256 tokens long.
Now I will discuss in a few moments why some reasons why we might want this to be larger versus smaller.
But anyway, these are the parameters that I will use for now.
So here's one example.
So here I get a batch of tokens, push those through the model and get the hidden states.
And then just printing out some of these.
Yeah one of these shapes of these tensors.
So we have 13 hidden states altogether.
Of course you know that that's the embeddings plus the 12 transformer blocks.
And then each one of those hidden states is of size 32 batches, 256 tokens and 768 dimensions.
Now here is the idea.
What we are going to do is pick one of these layers and one of these dimensions.
And that's going to give us a matrix of size 32 by 256.
And that corresponds to the activation for each of these tokens in each of these sequences for one specific
dimension.
So dimension 345 and from one specific layer I'm picking layer two.
So transformer block two okay.
So why do I pick these numbers.
No really no particular reason.
I just kind of randomly assembled this collection of four numbers here.
Okay.
So here I just get the activations.
I'm detaching them and bringing them back from the GPU to the CPU.
And basically the point of this line of code is just for convenience.
So I can have this one matrix instead of worrying about all of this business here.
Okay.
And then I want to find the maximum value in this matrix.
So actually let me just to make sure this is really clear.
So layer x dot shape.
So here we have 32 by 256.
And yeah this is 32 batches or one batch of 32 sequences and each of 256 tokens.
And now from here.
So these are not the tokens anymore.
These are the activations for these tokens from this one dimension and this one layer.
So then I want to know what is the index.
So let me do this.
Now numpy dot arg max.
What is the index at which this reaches a maximum.
So this has a maximum activation value at index 4024.
Now this is a linear index.
So it's wrapping around the rows and the columns.
So therefore just to make this convenient I flatten out x as well.
This is the matrix of tokens.
And then I can use this as a linear index.
And this gives me the token index at which the activation was the maximum.
And then we can decode that.
So then we find that the token with the maximum activation is the word space before.
So the token space before.
Okay.
So that's pretty interesting.
This is for one batch.
Now that doesn't tell us that this is the before dimension in the model.
All it tells us is that in this particular batch, this specific batch, that one token got the largest
activation from this dimension and so on.
Okay.
So now what I'm going to do is repeat all of that code.
All of this stuff is exactly the same that I just showed you.
Except here I'm storing the result.
Actually, I'm just storing the index here.
Just because it's easier to store in a matrix and not the token itself.
But anyway, then I'm repeating that analysis 1000 times.
So I'm going to run this now.
It takes somewhere around two minutes on the GPU.
I did not time this on the CPU, but I guess it would take quite a bit longer than the GPU.
So now I've run this 1000 times.
And now what I do here is find all of the unique values in this tokens matrix.
So now we can imagine two different possibilities.
How many unique elements will there be?
We can imagine the one extreme where this analysis works super duper well.
And then every single token will be exactly the same.
I will get back to that in a moment, whether that's even possible.
But, you know, imagine out of this 1000 tokens, maybe there's only like five unique tokens that would
indicate that the model, every time the model sees the word or this dimension from this layer sees
the word the, then it always just responds a lot.
So then we're always going to get the out here.
On the other hand, if it's completely random, the this dimension for this model, for this layer has
no preference whatsoever for any particular word or category or set of words.
Then we would expect this to be basically a thousand the unique elements to be 1000, because each time
we present new tokens, it's going to be a completely random selection of tokens.
So let's see what we get.
Uh, the answer is somewhere in between 5 and 1000.
Actually, these are very, very small.
So it turns out that This dimension for this layer really likes the word before.
So we get a space before.
And that elicits that token elicits the maximum activation in for this dimension for this layer.
Almost half of the time.
So almost half of the batches.
And then when we look at some of the other ones I'm not sure yet.
This is a subword here.
So I'm not sure what parts of the word this would correspond to in principle, that something you could
check by adding to the code, but it's not.
The code doesn't do that here.
And then we also see before with capital and before here.
So this is a different token from this one because this has a space in front and this one doesn't.
And even when we look at the other tokens we see we get first faster head you know similar words to
before.
Here's also first quicker I don't know.
Yeah.
This maybe is related to temporal precedence, which is a similar concept as before.
So overall we seem to get something, you know, we seem to be hitting on something here.
Now you can run this code lots of times.
It's always going to generate new random batches.
But it will always kind of like this word before first quicker faster things words like that.
But that is not just something trivial.
Because now what I'll do is change this.
Let's say I don't know six and I'll just make that a five.
So again, I have no a priori motivation for picking these numbers.
It's pretty random.
Okay.
So now I'm going to run this again.
So let's see what these results look like.
This is still from the previous run.
We get lots of befores first quicker faster and so on.
Here we see the list is a little bit longer.
Uh, and yeah we get some I don't know, some formatting, uh, thing.
Hope course gun family afraid states.
Wish I will let you decide whether you think that there is any meaningful relationship across some of
these top activated tokens, but it's certainly nothing really obvious.
It's not like the same word is appearing multiple times.
Okay, the last thing I want to discuss is the question of this trade off between, uh, where is it
this, uh, the, the batch size in terms of the number of sequences and the number of tokens per sequence
versus the number of samples.
Now, here's the thing.
You can imagine making this as big as possible.
So maybe this is 1024.
And I don't know maybe you make this 128 debatable whether this matrix and all of the activations would
actually fit on the GPU, but even if they would, then, you know, that would be great because then
each individual batch has a huge number of tokens, over 100,000 tokens.
So we're highly likely to get a sufficient amount of variability of tokens.
But on the other hand, if you do that, you might want to reduce the number of samples just to get
it to run in a reasonable time frame.
And that means that you're going to have a smaller number here for collecting these statistics.
On the other hand, you can imagine setting the number of samples to be really high, but setting the
number of batches to be really small.
Maybe you do it something like, uh, how about that?
So now the batches are really small.
The risk here is that you just don't have a lot of variability in the tokens because you're just randomly
selecting tokens.
Also, you know, other typical limitations Imitations of this as a kind of research investigation.
As I've discussed repeatedly in this course, for example, I'm only using exactly one text.
Of course, if you were doing this in a real research, you would want to basically find a nice balance
to increase these numbers and also keep this number pretty high.
And of course, if you're doing this for a, you know, let's say a three month research project, then
you can let this code run for a week.
And it's fine.
You get an enormous amount of data from that.
And then of course, we have the issue of scaling and feasibility, where searching through all 768
dimensions times 12 layers is just not feasible for a human being to do.
Here are some advantages and limitations of this approach.
Let's start with the advantages, Because I like starting with things that are positive.
So unlike the gradient ascent approach that I showed in the previous several videos, this approach
here uses real words from real human written text, and that means that the results are likely to be
more interpretable to us humans.
Of course, human interpretability is not guaranteed by the method, but using real texts instead of
random noise that we try to shape into a meaningful token sequence does make this approach at least
more likely to be interpretable.
As you saw, it takes very little code to run this analysis.
And again, I want to be clear with the phrasing here.
I'm not claiming that the results will always be understandable and reproducible, but the method itself
is easy to understand.
It's easy to explain.
It's easy for anyone else to code up in a different model.
And because it's so simple, it's also easy to adapt to other features of the model.
For example, here I used an output dimension from a transformer block.
But actually this kind of a method is more commonly done with individual neurons, for example inside
an MLP sub block.
Now, the reason why I focused on the output dimension from a transformer block is really just because
I haven't yet introduced you to extracting activations from individual neurons within the transformer
blocks.
But it doesn't matter because the code, the approach, the parameters, everything is the same if you're
looking at different components of the model.
Okay, all of these points aside, obviously this method is not super fantastic.
Otherwise this video would be the end of the course.
So there are some limitations.
I think the main disadvantage of this method is with the scalability.
So even if we are just thinking about GPT two small, we already have over 9000 dimensions to search
through.
And that is not even including all of the neurons in the MLP and the attention layers.
So it's just a massive problem to try to figure out how to understand so many tens of thousands of results,
like what we did, uh, a moment ago in the Python demo.
Furthermore, it might be difficult to identify some higher level concepts that a model dimension is
actually coding for.
So maybe it's just difficult for us humans trying to interpret the results to figure out what is really
connecting all of the highly activated words.
Now, that is especially true if we aren't using a diverse enough data set.
And that leads me to this third limitation here, which is that some representations of concepts like
temporal precedence might not exist only in one dimension, in only one layer, just because we happen
to be searching in that particular dimension.
So these representations, this coding might be distributed over some or many dimensions, many neurons
in one or more transformer blocks.
And then the final limitation that I list here is that this method actually ignores all of the contextual
information, because we're only looking for individual tokens that give maximum activation.
We're not searching for token sequences that provide a context for interpreting each current token.
So overall, I and many other people really like the idea of activation maximization via data sampling.
Now, if you have a relatively small model or if you have a really specific targeted hypothesis whereby
you have a very specific layer or neuron or set of neurons to investigate, then this approach can be
really great, easy to implement and easy to interpret.
But unfortunately, it's just not really scalable to large models, especially where you don't really
know exactly what you're looking for.
You're just kind of poking around and searching through lots and lots of data.
Still, it's a great analysis to know about, and I hope that you now feel a tiny bit smarter compared
to at the beginning of this video.